The ground floor or cellar stored the
provisions needed to survive a long
siege. Dry goods, perishable food, wine,
ale, and sometimes a well for fresh
water. Some keeps also had a kitchen
here reserved for preparing meals for
the Lord's family and honored guests.
The first floor, the entrance level, was
dominated by the great hall where the
Lord conducted business, hosted
meetings, and held grand feasts. Often
the largest room in the keep. It
sometimes spanned two stories with a
soaring ceiling.
Above on the second floor gallery, a
mural walkway ran within the thickness
of the walls, its windows bringing light
into the hall below. If the hall was
breached, defenders could use this
gallery to fire down on attackers from
above.
Guest chambers for important visitors
were located on the third floor. On the
same level was the solar, the private
living and sleeping quarters for the
Lord and his family. This floor also
contained the private chapel reserved
for their use as well as the garter
robes from the French for wardrobe.
Simple toilets where waste dropped down
vertical shafts into pits or in some
cases directly into the moat.